# Computational Geometry: Course 6

# Triangulation

Last day we saw the 2 ears theorem. (We have at least 2 ears on a polygon with $\geq 4$ vertices).

## Algorithm

- **First**: Check if a convex vertex is an ear. $O(n)$
- **Second**: Find an ear P $O(n^2)$
```
for i = 1 to n
    if vertex i is LT (LEFT ORIENT):
    check if i is an ear
```
- **Third**: Triangulate $O(n^3)$
```
Repeat n-2 times
    Find an ear
    Cut it
```

### Speedup

We now have a slow algorithm that works, now we should find a way to speed it up.

**Definition**: A chord is a line that goes from a convex vertex to a point that is found on the ear that it forms.

To find a chord we take $O(n)$.

New algorithm:

- **First**: Find a chord in $O(n)$
- **Second**: Recurse on the smaller side. The recurrent time then is:

$$T(n) \leq cn + T(\frac{n}{2}) \ \ \ \text{because smaller side}$$

$$T(n) \leq cn + c\frac{n}{2} + T(\frac{n}{4})$$

$$T(n) \leq cn + c\frac{n}{2} + c\frac{n}{4} + T(\frac{n}{8})$$

$$T(n) \leq cn(1 + \frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{4} \dots) = 2cn$$

- **Third** Find an ear in polygon with one forbidden edge $O(n^2)$

### Monotone polygons

We can see that Graham scan actually triangulates a polygon that can be seen from the bottom. This polygon can be called a half monotone polygon and the algorithm runs in $O(n)$.

**Definition**: Monotone polygon is a polygon such that any vertical line intersects it in one piece.

We have then an algorithm for full monotone polygons:

- **First**: We have a deque where the points at the bottom are inserted to the left and the points at the top are inserted in the right (red and blue vertices).
- **Second** Perform modified Graham Scan on that. Go from right to the left in the deque and perform left turn.
    - If we find a right turn, we add next vertex in the polygon and iterate.

This algorithm takes $O(n)$ time!

### Converting regular to Monotone

We will use a sweepline to do this with a set of events: start, end, split, join, regular vertices
(see events in book page 50 in book).

See book pages 50-55 for this section.



#Assignment

Implement a triangulation algorithm (the slowest or fastest one).
